Latest, with ch4 (#18)
riscv-non-isa/riscv-security-model: specification/src/chapter4.adoc

== Use case examples

> This chapter provides guidance for building secure Risc-V systems for a selection of common use cases. It is not intended to be an exhaustive selection. The purpose is to illustrate common principles that can be applied in a wide variety of use cases. 

Reviewer: Risc-V -> RISC-V

Additional use cases may be added in future versions.

=== Generic system

==== Overview

[caption="Figure {counter:image}: ", reftext="Figure {image}"]
[title= "Generic vertically integrated system"]
image::img_ch4_priv.png[]

A generic vertically integrated system can be either virtualized or non-virtualized. 

> M-mode hosts a FW RoT. An OS or a Hypervisor in S or HS mode controls applications or guests. Guests and applications execute in U or VS/VU modes and trust the OS or Hypervisor to provide isolation guarantees.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
M-mode hosts a FW RoT that typically is bootstrapped by a HW RoT. An OS or a Hypervisor in S or HS mode controls applications or guest VMs. Guest VMs and applications execute in U and/or VS/VU modes and trust the OS or Hypervisor to provide isolation guarantees.
```

Author: The relationships between FW RoT and HW RoT are defined in the reference model. We are not assuming that *all* use cases have a HW RoT, or even need one. Obviously many do and should, but not all require one.

Author: "Guest" is also used as a general term. "Guest VM" is only one possible example. Others include "Guest TEE", "Confidential guest", etc., depending on use case.

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN 
| A secure system SHOULD support either S mode, or the hypervisor extension (HS/VS/VU)

|===

NOTE: The RISC-V architecture also caters for systems with just M and U modes, commonly used in embedded systems, helper cores, and similar use cases. On secure systems not supporting S mode a FW RoT has to share M-mode with an OS. RISC-V does not exclude such implementations - for example, implementations using a certified OS and FW RoT, or using a HW RoT to isolate sensitive code and assets (physical isolation). There is no current mechanism in RISC-V for isolation within M-mode itself other than temporal boundaries +
 +

> To minimize the TCB of the FW RoT, RISC-V recommends that secure systems implement S mode and de-privilege the OS. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To minimize the TCB of the FW RoT, RISC-V recommends that secure systems implement S mode and de-privilege untrusted components from M-mode. 
```

Author: Not keen on "untrusted", it is a value word that evokes emotion :-)

I'll change to "non-RoT FW, such as an OS".

==== Isolation model

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN 

> | PMP/ePMP MUST be used to isolate M-mode from lower privilege levels.

Reviewer: PMP/ePMP/MTT

Author: Is MTT applicable in non-Domain use cases?

I guess it could be viewed as a system with a single SDID?

I have added it throughout this section.

| CAT_NNN 
| sPMP or MMU MUST be used to isolate user applications or virtual guests

|===

Using sPMP is typically a more static model and can achieve a more deterministic system, for example in automotive or automation use cases. 

MMU is typically required for Linux based systems, for example MMI use cases or edge devices.

Either MMU and sPMP can be used both with or without hypervisor extension. For example, the hypervisor extension with sPMP can support static partition hypervisors, commonly used in automotive. And a single stage MMU can be used without hypervisor extension for full Linux support.

==== Root of Trust

See xref:chapter2.adoc#_reference_model[reference model].

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN 
| A secure system SHOULD implement a HW RoT

|===

==== Authorized Boot

> Multiple models can be used to ensure a secure system can only run authorized software.

Reviewer 2: authenticated software?

Author: "Authorized" software is the generic term used throughout the document. It is defined in chapter 2 (ecosystem model), with all the combinations and permutations of measured and verified, local or remote authorization, etc.

I appreciate different ecosystems have slightly different taxonomy. Basically it is impossible to not offend someone. Chapter 2 should allow people to map to whatever taxonomy they happen to be used to, in whatever ecosystem they happen to come from.

See xref:chapter2.adoc#_authorized_software[authorized software].

==== Attestation

> Multiple models can be used to prove to a reliant party that a secure system is in a trustworthy state.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Multiple models can be used to prove to a relying party that a secure system is in a trustworthy state.
```

Reviewer 2: perhaps add a reference to IETF RATS framework for definition of relying party.

See xref:chapter2.adoc#_attestable_services[attestable services].

==== Sealing

Multiple models can be used to protect assets if a system is not in a trustworthy state.

See xref:chapter2.adoc#_sealing[sealing].

==== Device access control

For the purpose of this specification, a device can be a logical device. A physical device can present one or more logical devices, each with its own (logical) control interface.

Isolation guarantees provided to software also apply to device initiated transaction. 

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT NNN

> | IOPMP MUST be used to guarantee that devices assigned to lower privilege levels cannot access resources assigned to M-mode.

Reviewer: IOPMP or IOMTT

Author: Done, as for MTT comment above.

| CAT_NNN

> | IOPMP and IOMMU MUST be used to enforce access rules for devices assigned to user applications or guests on a virtualized system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| IOPMP or IOMTT with IOMMU MUST be used to enforce access rules for devices assigned to user applications or guests on a virtualized system.
```

|===

On a non-virtualized system, user devices can be managed by the OS which can enforce access rules for user applications.

On a virtualized system, devices can be virtualized and assigned to guests by the hypervisor configuring MMU and IOMMU translation rules. 

> In either case, physical device access rules are always enforced by IOPMP, controlled by RoT FW in M mode, preventing unauthorized device access to M-mode resources.

Reviewer: IOPMP or IOMTT

Author: Done, as MTT comment above.

=== Debug and performance management

See xref:chapter2.adoc#_security_lifecycle[security lifecycle]. +
See https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-external-debug-security[enhanced RISC-V external debug security]

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT NNN
| External debug SHOULD be enabled separately for M-mode and non M-mode software.

| CAT_NNN
| External debug MUST only be enabled by HW RoT (M-mode external debug) or by FW RoT (non M-mode external debug).

|===

Enables recoverable external debug of non M-mode software. In turn enabling supply chain separation.

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN
| Self-hosted debug MAY be used for debug of non M-mode software.

| CAT_NNN
| Self-hosted debug MUST only be enabled by a higher privileged component.

|===

> For example, within normal domain an S-mode OS can enable self-hosted debug for a user application. Only M-mode firmware should enable self-hosted debug for the S-mode OS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, within a supervisor domain an S-mode OS can enable self-hosted debug for a user application. Only M-mode firmware should enable self-hosted debug for the S-mode OS.
```

Author: This example is more specific to the use case, so I made the text specific to the use case as well.

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN
| FW RoT MAY disable self-hosted debug for all non M-mode software.

|===

For example, disable self-hosted debug in a production system for certification reasons.

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN

> | External debug MUST only be enabled at boot (measuring) of the affected component.

Reviewer 3: what about password unlock mechanisms (challenge - response).  in the embedded space these are often applied after boot to gain access to a locked system

Author: Changed to "following system reset". And tweaked the other rules accordingly.

| CAT_NNN
| Revealing self-hosted debug MUST only be enabled at boot (measuring) of the affected component

| CAT_NNN
| Trusted self-hosted debug MAY be enabled after boot (measuring) of the affected component, to an application specific governance process.

|===

Guarantees the system remains attestable.

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN
| Lower privilege software MUST NOT be able to measure higher privilege software.

> 

Reviewer: monitor?

Reviewer 2: again better to be specific - monitor higher privilege software using performance counters/events.

Author: Fixed throughout document.

| CAT_NNN

> | Software in one domain MUST NOT be able to measure software in a different domain, without consent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Software in one domain MUST NOT be able to monitor the activity of software in a different domain, without consent managed by the higher privilege software.
```

Author: I will tweak the same statements throughout the document, for consistency.

* TEE domain +
Hosts a _TEE OS_ (domain security manager) and _trusted applications (TA)_. 
* Root domain +
Hosts RoT firmware, including a secure monitor.

The TEE OS is primarily responsible for isolation of TA, and for providing root of trust services, within the TEE domain.

The OS in Normal domain typically controls scheduling on the system, across all Harts available to it. To interact with TA services in TEE domain, the OS in Normal domain interacts with a TEE OS through a secure monitor in Root domain. 

The secure monitor is responsible for context switching and isolation across domain boundaries, including event management. 

For the purpose of this specification, TEE deployment models can be separated as:

* Static partition TEE +
A single TEE provides security services to Normal domain. TA are typically installed at boot by RoT FW and TEE OS, though Global Platform does also define protocols for installation of TA at runtime. System configuration and resource allocation can be mostly static, making the system more deterministic. +
 +
_Use case examples:_ edge devices and IoT, automation, and automotive. 
* Virtualized TEE +

> On a virtualized system, TEE can also be virtualized. In this case a _secure partition manager_ in TEE domain is responsible for isolation of multiple TEE guests (for example, an OEM TEE and separate third party TEE). This model can also support more dynamic resource allocation. +

Reviewer 3: have we considreed the case where there are multiple TEE security monitors in parallel at HS. perhaps a payment TSM and an  OEM TSM, for certification, or compatibility / portability reasons.

Author: This is the "virtualized TEE" use case (Arm TZ-A with S-EL2, for example).

I this case there is an SPM at HS level in TEE domain, managing multiple "guest" TEE. For example, one for OEM "stuff", one for third party "stuff" (payment clients), one for Android "stuff", etc.

 +
_Use case examples:_ mobile clients, and automotive.

==== Isolation model

A Global Platform TEE requires the following isolation guarantees:

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN  
| Root domain MAY access resources assigned to any domain, but SHOULD prevent itself from unintended access to resources assigned to a different domain (privilege escalation).

| CAT_NNN
| No other domains can access resources assigned to Root domain

| CAT_NNN
| Resources assigned to TEE domain MUST NOT be accessible to Normal domain

| CAT_NNN
| Resources assigned to Normal domain MUST be accessible to Normal domain (r/w/x), and to TEE domain (r/w) (default sharing rule)

| CAT_NNN
| Resources assigned to a single TA, or a guest TEE, MUST not be accessible by a different TA, or guest TEE.

|===

> The standard GP TEE model does not support sharing memory between TA in TEE domain. Each TA is expected to be a self-contained unit providing a specific security service, either to Normal domain or to other TA. All communications are implemented through secure channels managed by the TEE OS or SPM. 

Reviewer 3: GP model doesnt support this, but i have seen systems requiring inter TA communication and shared memory. for instance watermarking  and secure video pipe management.

Processes in Normal domain can share memory assigned to Normal domain when interacting with a TA in TEE world (default sharing rule). Such shared memory can be cached when context switching between Normal and TEE domains.

RISC-V hardware enforced isolation mechanisms can be used as follows to meet those guarantees:

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN 
| PMP/ePMP, or MTT, MUST be used to isolate Root domain from other domains.

| CAT_NNN  

> | Supervisor domains MUST be used to enforce isolation between Normal and TEE domains.

Reviewer 3: and between TEE domains

Author: The rule already states this?

|===

See xref:chapter3.adoc#_supervisor_domains[supervisor domains].

For static partition TEE, using PMP/ePMP or PMA with supervisor domains can be sufficient. 

> 

Reviewer: PMA is not a isolation mechanism. Should it have been MTT?

Reviewer 4: Why is PMA not an isolation mechanism? A memory map that doesn't map a portion of the physical address space that contains a secure device would be isolating it.

Reviewer 2: PMA specifies attributes for memory - e.g. uncacheable, it does not specify access permissions.

Author: There is nothing preventing PMA to be used for this. They go hand in hand with PMP to enforce memory access rules. Granted there are no standardised fields for it, but it still an implementation choice available "underneath" smmtt. 

Arguably, MTT combines PMP with PMA (svpam) in the same way.

Reviewer 2: then perhaps state it this way:

"For static partition TEE, using PMP/ePMP, or MTT, with supervisor domains can be sufficient - with PMAs used for to assign additional attributes to physical memory e.g. cryptographic memory protection."

Author: I have re-written this. See if that works better.

For virtualized TEE, MTT should be used with supervisor domains.

NOTE: MTT can be sufficient for protecting Root domain in the sense that M-mode can enforce that its own resources are never assigned to another domain. PMP/ePMP still add further protections for M-mode, such as the ability to implement temporal isolation boundaries within M-mode (for example, protect early boot code), or to prevent itself from accessing or executing from memory assigned to lower privilege levels (privilege escalation).

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN
| For a static partition TEE, sPMP or MMU MUST be used to enforce isolation between TA in TEE domain.
|===

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN

> | For a virtualized TEE, hypervisor extension MUST be supported

Reviewer 3: do we consider the case with no Hypervisor, but multiple isolated supervisor domains  ? ree, tee1, tee2 for example

NOTE: IOMTT can also be sufficient for protecting Root devices in the sense that M-mode can enforce that its own resources are never assigned to another domain. Use of IOPMP or similar still adds further protections. For example, a system may require that Root devices cannot be used to access memory assigned to Confidential domain.

==== System integration

In the case of a Global Platform TEE system a rich OS in Normal domain is free to schedule services, including TEE services, on any Hart available to it. The number and make-up of supervisor domains can be known, and a simple convention can be used for common identification (SDID value, see xref:chapter3.adoc#_supervisor_domains[supervisor domains]) of Normal, TEE, and Root domains across multiple Harts in a system. 

System integration in this context involves providing _security attributes_ on a system interconnect, tagging all transactions (CPU or system agent initiated) to either Root, Normal, or TEE domains. 

Possible use cases include:

* Tweaking cryptographic memory protection (uniqueness)
* Tagging interrupts, debug accesses, or coherent memory accesses
* Device assignment (IOPMP/IOMTT integration), static or dynamic

> For interoperability, an implementation could adopt the following convention commonly used in Global Platform TEE ecosystems:

Reviewer 3: is this a bit too arm ? also limits to single TEE domain. ( comment below talks about extending granularity)

Author: It probably is too Arm. I will remove it. I was debating it with myself even when writing it :-)

Like you say, that particular encoding only applies to systems that try to interoperate with the Arm version of GP TEE. And they simply follow Arm specifications for this.

There is nothing in either GP TEE or RISC-V supervisor domains that prevent people from going beyond Arm.

[width=30%]
[%header, cols="30,20"]
|===
| 
| Security attribute

| TEE domain
| 2'b00

| Normal domain
| 2'b01

| Root domain
| 2'10

| Reserved +
(Confidential domain)
| 2'11

|===

The attributes can be derived, for example, from SDID and privilege level, from PMA, or from MTT dynamic PMA (svpam).

For some use cases security attributes can be extended to reflect finer granularity, for example for cryptographic memory protection with TA granularity.

=== Debug and performance management

See xref:chapter2.adoc#_security_lifecycle[security lifecycle]. +
See https://github.com/riscv-non-isa/riscv-external-debug-security[enhanced RISC-V external debug security]

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN
| External debug MUST be enabled separately for Root domain.

| CAT_NNN
| External debug MUST be enabled separately for each supervisor domain.

| CAT_NNN

> | External debug MUST only be enabled by a HW RoT (Root domain external debug) or by Root domain (supervisor domain external debug).

Reviewer 3: HW RoT is optional elsewhere (should)

Author: In chapter two, I clarified the "MUST" and "SHOULD" for HW RoT.

Basically I don't think we can "mandate" HW RoT for every conceivable use case. Plenty of use cases, like "small" embedded systems, would be overkill to require a separate HW RoT. Whereas on "larger" complex systems it is a definite MUST.

I think the revised rules make this clearer.

In the use cases it is currently "SHOULD" in the generic "non-domain" case for the reasons above. And a MUST for GP TEE and CoVE use cases.

| CAT_NNN 
| A CoVE system MUST implement a HW RoT

|===

==== Authorized Boot

See xref:chapter2.adoc#_authorized_software[authorized software].

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN 
a| Confidential guests MUST not boot until at least the security platform has been verified:

* TSM in Confidential domain
* Root domain
* Boot state of all trusted subsystems
|===

Boot in a cloud hosting context is typically based on:

* Measured boot of a hosting platform, including Root domain and TSM
* Platform attestation and security provisioning (unsealing) by a remote provisioning system
* Launch and measurement of confidential workloads, only once the system has been unsealed

A _trusted platform module_ (TPM) can be used to measure the security platform.

Measuring confidential guests can be done by TSM in Confidential domain.

The process can involve multiple stages (layered boot). 

==== Attestation

See xref:chapter2.adoc#_attestable_services[attestable services].

Attestation of confidential workloads is typically layered, for performance and separation of concern:

* A security platform attestation, signed by a hardware root of trust

> * A confidential workload attestation, signed by TSM

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A confidential workload attestation, signed by TSM, where the TSM is authenticated by the HW RoT
```

Author: This would duplicate the bullet above. "Security platform" is defined in the next paragraph.

Reviewer 2: then we should move that one above this one.

Author: That breaks the flow. The two bullets introduce the concept of layering. Then the individual components are expanded and defined in more detail. The same format is used throughout the document. Changing the format here means changing throughout the document for consistency. I would rather not do that unless there is some major issue here. I don't see one?

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN 
a| A security platform attestation MUST cover at least: 

> * TSM

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* HW RoT
* TSM
```

NOTE: IOMTT can also be sufficient for protecting Root devices in the sense that M-mode can enforce that its own resources are never assigned to another domain. Use of IOPMP or similar still adds further protections. For example, a system may require that Root devices cannot be used to access memory assigned to Confidential domain.

==== System integration

In the case of a confidential compute system, hypervisor in Normal domain typically controls scheduling and resource assignment on the system across all Harts available to it. The number and make-up of supervisor domains can be known, and a simple convention can be used for common identification of Normal, Confidential, and Root domains across multiple Harts in a system. 

System integration in this context involves providing _security attributes_ on the interconnect, tagging all transactions (CPU or system agent initiated) to either Root, Normal, or TEE domains. 

Possible use cases include:

* Tweaking cryptographic memory protection (uniqueness)
* Tagging interrupts, debug accesses, or coherent memory accesses
* Device assignment (IOPMP/IOMTT integration), static or dynamic

> The attributes can be derived, for example, from MTT dynamic PMA (svpam).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The attributes can be derived, for example, from dynamic meta-data during Sv address translation (Svpam).
```

|===
| ID#     
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN
| External debug MUST only be enabled at boot (measuring) of the affected component.

| CAT_NNN
| Revealing self-hosted debug MUST only be enabled at boot (measuring) of the affected component

| CAT_NNN
| Trusted self-hosted debug MAY be enabled after boot of the affected component, to an application specific governance process.

|===

Guarantees the system remains attestable.

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN
| Lower privilege software MUST NOT be able to measure higher privilege software.

| CAT_NNN
| Software in one domain MUST NOT be able to measure software in a different domain, without consent.

|===

Prevents using event counters to measure across guest/application, privilege and supervisor domain boundaries. 

Event counters can be managed by higher privileged software as part of context switching across boundaries.

==== Platform QoS

See xref:chapter2.adoc#_platform_quality_of_service[platform quality of service].

[width=100%]
[%header, cols="5,20"]
|===
| ID#
| Requirement

| CAT_NNN
| Lower privilege software MUST NOT be able to measure higher privilege software.

| CAT_NNN

> | Software in one domain MUST NOT be able to measure software in a different domain, without consent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Software in one domain MUST NOT be able to monitor software in a different domain via architectural performance events/counters, without consent from a higher privilege level.
```
